README.md, before:

// Developer: inkbytefo
// AI: Claude Sonnet 4.5
// Modified: 2025-11-01

# TMA-1: Turkish Morphology-Aware Transformer and Tokenizer

TMA-1 is a Turkish-focused language modeling stack combining a morphology-aware tokenizer (MorphoPiece), grammar-informed attention mechanisms, and PyTorch-based transformer training. The system is designed for agglutinative languages (like Turkish) where morphemes and suffix ordering matter.

This repository includes:
- MorphoPiece: a SentencePiece-backed tokenizer with Turkish morpheme awareness
- MorphoSplitter: robust morphological splitter (Java/Zemberek optional, regex fallback)
- GrammarEngine: vowel-harmony and suffix ordering biasing
- AgglutinativeAttention: attention mechanism informed by morphology and SOV tendencies
- TransformerModel and TMA-1 model: standard and morphology-aware variants
- Training pipelines: tokenizer pretraining, standard LM pretraining, and TMA-1 training
- Tests validating morphology, tokenizer, datasets, and inference utilities

## Quickstart

1) Set up environment:
```
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\activate
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2) Prepare a small corpus for smoke tests:
```
python scripts/make_test_corpus.py
```

3) Train a MorphoPiece tokenizer on processed corpus (or use tiny corpus for quick run):
```
python src/train_morphopiece.py --preprocess --corpus-file data/test_corpus.txt --preprocessed-file data/corpus_morpho_processed.txt --train --output tokenizer/morphopiece --vocab-size 1000
```

4) **Preprocess corpus for TMA-1 (NEW - Required for optimal performance):**
```
python scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py \
    --input data/test_corpus.txt \
    --output data/train_data.jsonl \
    --tokenizer tokenizer/morphopiece.model
```

5) Train the baseline transformer:
```
python train.py --corpus data/test_corpus.txt --tokenizer tokenizer/morphopiece.model --output-dir models/baseline
```

6) Train the morphology-aware TMA-1 model (using preprocessed JSONL):
```
python train_tma1.py --corpus data/train_data.jsonl --tokenizer tokenizer/morphopiece.model --output-dir models/tma1
```

7) Run tests:
```
pytest -q
```

## Repository Structure

- `src/morpho_splitter.py`: Morpheme splitter with optional Zemberek integration and a deterministic regex fallback for CI/Windows
- `src/morphopiece.py`: MorphoPiece tokenizer wrapper, integrates morpheme-aware preprocessing with SentencePiece
- `src/grammar_engine.py`: Grammar rules for Turkish (vowel harmony, forbidden combinations, suffix order), applies **vectorized logit biases** (optimized)
- `src/agglutinative_attention.py`: Attention module that uses morphology labels to bias Q/K/V dynamics (supports preprocessed `morpho_types` tensors)
- `src/model.py`: Baseline TransformerModel and layers (MultiHeadAttention, FeedForward)
- `src/tma1_model.py`: Morphology-aware transformer with optional GrammarEngine biasing
- `src/dataset.py`: Streaming dataset with buffer loading, SentencePiece encoding, padding/shifted targets, and **JSONL support with preprocessed morpho_types**
- `src/train_morphopiece.py`: Download, preprocess, and train SentencePiece with morpheme-aware text
- `src/train_tokenizer.py`: Simpler tokenizer training utility
- `train.py`: Baseline model training loop with checkpoints and TensorBoard
- `train_tma1.py`: TMA-1 training loop integrating morphology and grammar bias (**optimized with preprocessing**)
- `llm_engine.py`: Inference engine for loading checkpoints and generating text
- `scripts/make_test_corpus.py`: Utility to create a 100-line test corpus for smoke runs
- `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py`: **NEW** - Preprocesses corpus with morphological analysis, outputs JSONL with `morpho_types` for fast training
- `tests/`: Comprehensive unit tests for morphology, tokenizer, dataset, and engine

## Data Flow

- Data is downloaded via `src/data_collector.py` from HF datasets and cleaned. For testing, use `scripts/make_test_corpus.py` and `tests/test_corpus.txt`.
- `train_morphopiece.py` can preprocess raw text by splitting into morphemes, producing `corpus_morpho_processed.txt`.
- SentencePiece tokenizer is trained on morpheme-separated text, ensuring morphemes appear as distinct tokens.
- **NEW**: `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py` preprocesses corpus with morphological analysis, outputting JSONL format with `morpho_types` (0=root, 1=suffix, 2=verb, 3=other, 4=pad) for each token. This eliminates runtime morphological analysis during training, providing **10-100x speedup**.
- The dataset (`src/dataset.py`) supports both text and JSONL formats:
  - **Text format**: Encodes via SentencePiece, pads/truncates, yields input/target pairs (fallback mode, slower)
  - **JSONL format**: Reads preprocessed `morpho_types` tensors directly (recommended, fast)
- Baseline training (`train.py`) builds a vanilla transformer and optimizes via cross-entropy.
- TMA-1 training (`train_tma1.py`) uses preprocessed `morpho_types` tensors for morphology-aware attention and **vectorized grammar biases** (no vocabulary loops), dramatically improving training speed.

## Core Concepts

- Morphology Awareness: Words are split into root + suffix tokens to better capture agglutinative structure.
- **Preprocessing Optimization**: Morphological analysis is performed **once during preprocessing**, not during training. Results are cached in JSONL format with `morpho_types` tensors for each token.
- Grammar Biasing: **Vectorized** logit adjustments enforce vowel harmony and typical suffix sequences using PyTorch tensor operations (no vocabulary loops), providing significant performance improvements.
- Attention Augmentation: Tokens are labeled as root/suffix/verb (via preprocessed `morpho_types`), and attention applies learned biases based on these types using efficient tensor operations.

## Ownership and Licensing

This project and models are proprietary. All rights reserved by Tevfik İşkın. See `LICENSE.md` for details.

## Running and Testing

- Dependencies: see `requirements.txt`
- Tests: `pytest -q`
- Linting: for Python, you can use `ruff` or `flake8` if desired (not enforced by this repo); ensure PEP8 compliance.

## Troubleshooting

- Windows/Java: Zemberek requires a Java runtime. Tests use regex fallback (`use_java=False`) to avoid Java dependency.
- GPU: If CUDA is available, PyTorch will use it automatically; otherwise CPU is used.
- Tokenizer: Ensure `tokenizer/morphopiece.model` exists before training models, or run `src/train_morphopiece.py`.
- **Slow Training**: Use preprocessed JSONL format instead of text format. Run `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py` first to generate JSONL with `morpho_types` for 10-100x speedup.
- **Memory Issues**: If preprocessing fails due to memory, use `--max-lines` parameter in `preprocess_for_tma1.py` to limit corpus size.

Commit message:

feat(preprocessing): enhance morphological analysis with detailed categories and semantic classification
- Updated `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py` to include 23 detailed morpheme categories and semantic categories for improved token representation.
- Enhanced `train_tma1.py` to accommodate new semantic categories during training.
- Modified `TurkishTextDataset` to handle semantic categories alongside morpho_types, ensuring compatibility with updated preprocessing.
- Improved documentation in `README.md` and `ARCHITECTURE.md` to reflect changes in preprocessing and model architecture.
- Adjusted model architecture in `tma1_model.py` to incorporate semantic embeddings, enhancing model's ability to learn from morpheme and semantic information.

README.md, after:

// Developer: inkbytefo
// AI: Claude Sonnet 4.5
// Modified: 2025-11-01

# TMA-1: Turkish Morphology-Aware Transformer and Tokenizer

TMA-1 is a Turkish-focused language modeling stack combining a morphology-aware tokenizer (MorphoPiece), grammar-informed attention mechanisms, and PyTorch-based transformer training. The system is designed for agglutinative languages (like Turkish) where morphemes and suffix ordering matter.

This repository includes:
- MorphoPiece: a SentencePiece-backed tokenizer with Turkish morpheme awareness
- MorphoSplitter: robust morphological splitter (Java/Zemberek optional, regex fallback)
- GrammarEngine: vowel-harmony and suffix ordering biasing
- AgglutinativeAttention: attention mechanism informed by morphology and SOV tendencies
- TransformerModel and TMA-1 model: standard and morphology-aware variants
- Training pipelines: tokenizer pretraining, standard LM pretraining, and TMA-1 training
- Tests validating morphology, tokenizer, datasets, and inference utilities

## Quickstart

1) Set up environment:
```
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\activate
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2) Prepare a small corpus for smoke tests:
```
python scripts/make_test_corpus.py
```

3) Train a MorphoPiece tokenizer on processed corpus (or use tiny corpus for quick run):
```
python src/train_morphopiece.py --preprocess --corpus-file data/test_corpus.txt --preprocessed-file data/corpus_morpho_processed.txt --train --output tokenizer/morphopiece --vocab-size 1000
```

4) **Preprocess corpus for TMA-1 (NEW - Required for optimal performance):**
```
python scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py \
    --input data/test_corpus.txt \
    --output data/train_data.jsonl \
    --tokenizer tokenizer/morphopiece.model
```

5) Train the baseline transformer:
```
python train.py --corpus data/test_corpus.txt --tokenizer tokenizer/morphopiece.model --output-dir models/baseline
```

6) Train the morphology-aware TMA-1 model (using preprocessed JSONL):
```
python train_tma1.py --corpus data/train_data.jsonl --tokenizer tokenizer/morphopiece.model --output-dir models/tma1
```

7) Run tests:
```
pytest -q
```

## Repository Structure

- `src/morpho_splitter.py`: Morpheme splitter with optional Zemberek integration and a deterministic regex fallback for CI/Windows
- `src/morphopiece.py`: MorphoPiece tokenizer wrapper, integrates morpheme-aware preprocessing with SentencePiece
- `src/grammar_engine.py`: Grammar rules for Turkish (vowel harmony, forbidden combinations, suffix order), applies **vectorized logit biases** (optimized)
- `src/agglutinative_attention.py`: Attention module that uses morphology labels to bias Q/K/V dynamics (supports preprocessed `morpho_types` tensors)
- `src/model.py`: Baseline TransformerModel and layers (MultiHeadAttention, FeedForward)
- `src/tma1_model.py`: Morphology-aware transformer with optional GrammarEngine biasing
- `src/dataset.py`: Streaming dataset with buffer loading, SentencePiece encoding, padding/shifted targets, and **JSONL support with preprocessed morpho_types**
- `src/train_morphopiece.py`: Download, preprocess, and train SentencePiece with morpheme-aware text
- `src/train_tokenizer.py`: Simpler tokenizer training utility
- `train.py`: Baseline model training loop with checkpoints and TensorBoard
- `train_tma1.py`: TMA-1 training loop integrating morphology and grammar bias (**optimized with preprocessing**)
- `llm_engine.py`: Inference engine for loading checkpoints and generating text
- `scripts/make_test_corpus.py`: Utility to create a 100-line test corpus for smoke runs
- `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py`: **NEW** - Preprocesses corpus with morphological analysis, outputs JSONL with `morpho_types` for fast training
- `tests/`: Comprehensive unit tests for morphology, tokenizer, dataset, and engine

## Data Flow

- Data is downloaded via `src/data_collector.py` from HF datasets and cleaned. For testing, use `scripts/make_test_corpus.py` and `tests/test_corpus.txt`.
- `train_morphopiece.py` can preprocess raw text by splitting into morphemes, producing `corpus_morpho_processed.txt`.
- SentencePiece tokenizer is trained on morpheme-separated text, ensuring morphemes appear as distinct tokens.
- **NEW**: `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py` preprocesses corpus with morphological analysis, outputting JSONL format with `morpho_types` (23 detailed categories: kökler, iyelik, durum, zaman ekleri, vb.) for each token. This eliminates runtime morphological analysis during training, providing **10-100x speedup**.
- The dataset (`src/dataset.py`) supports both text and JSONL formats:
  - **Text format**: Encodes via SentencePiece, pads/truncates, yields input/target pairs (fallback mode, slower)
  - **JSONL format**: Reads preprocessed `morpho_types` tensors directly (recommended, fast)
- Baseline training (`train.py`) builds a vanilla transformer and optimizes via cross-entropy.
- TMA-1 training (`train_tma1.py`) uses preprocessed `morpho_types` tensors for morphology-aware attention and **vectorized grammar biases** (no vocabulary loops), dramatically improving training speed.

## Core Concepts

- Morphology Awareness: Words are split into root + suffix tokens to better capture agglutinative structure.
- **Explicit Morpheme Representations (NEW)**: Model uses separate embeddings for 23 detailed morpheme types (kökler, iyelik ekleri, durum ekleri, zaman ekleri, vb.). These embeddings are additively combined with word embeddings, enabling the model to learn shared semantic knowledge across morphemes and improve generalization.
- **Preprocessing Optimization**: Morphological analysis is performed **once during preprocessing**, not during training. Results are cached in JSONL format with `morpho_types` tensors for each token (23 categories).
- Grammar Biasing: **Vectorized** logit adjustments enforce vowel harmony and typical suffix sequences using PyTorch tensor operations (no vocabulary loops), providing significant performance improvements.
- Attention Augmentation: Tokens are labeled with detailed morpheme types (via preprocessed `morpho_types`), and attention applies learned biases based on these types using efficient tensor operations.

## Ownership and Licensing

This project and models are proprietary. All rights reserved by Tevfik İşkın. See `LICENSE.md` for details.

## Running and Testing

- Dependencies: see `requirements.txt`
- Tests: `pytest -q`
- Linting: for Python, you can use `ruff` or `flake8` if desired (not enforced by this repo); ensure PEP8 compliance.

## Troubleshooting

- Windows/Java: Zemberek requires a Java runtime. Tests use regex fallback (`use_java=False`) to avoid Java dependency.
- GPU: If CUDA is available, PyTorch will use it automatically; otherwise CPU is used.
- Tokenizer: Ensure `tokenizer/morphopiece.model` exists before training models, or run `src/train_morphopiece.py`.
- **Slow Training**: Use preprocessed JSONL format instead of text format. Run `scripts/preprocess_for_tma1.py` first to generate JSONL with `morpho_types` for 10-100x speedup.
- **Memory Issues**: If preprocessing fails due to memory, use `--max-lines` parameter in `preprocess_for_tma1.py` to limit corpus size.
